# Templates In-Depth
<!-- TOC -->

- [Templates In-Depth](#templates-in-depth)
- [Sections In-Depth](#sections-in-depth)
  - [AWSTemplateFormatVersion](#awstemplateformatversion)
  - [Description](#description)
  - [Metadata](#metadata)
  - [Parameters](#parameters)
  - [Mappings](#mappings)
  - [Conditions](#conditions)
  - [Transform](#transform)
  - [Resources](#resources)
  - [Outputs](#outputs)
- [Intrinsic Function](#intrinsic-function)

<!-- /TOC -->
---
# Sections In-Depth
## AWSTemplateFormatVersion
* Identifies the capability of the template
* The latest template version is `2010-09-09`, and is the only current valid version.
## Description
* The Description is optional, but if included, must come after the `AWSTemplateFormatVersion`.
## Metadata
* Allows inclusion of arbitrary objects that provide details about the template.
* Examples would be providing detailed information about a database or web application you are creating.
## Parameters
* Parameters allow you to pass values into your template when you create a stack.
* Each parameter specified must contain a value when you create a stack.
## Mappings
* Mappings match a key to a corresponding set of named values.
* A common use of Mappings is to map an instance type to an architecture or an AMI ID.
## Conditions
* Includes statements that define when a resource is created or when a property is defined.
* You might use Conditions when you want to reuse a template that can create different resources in different contexts.
* Example: `dev` vs `prod` environment. You could use a Condition to deploy different sized instances based on the environment.
* To use Conditions, you need to incorporate 3 sections of the templates:
  * Parameters - what do you want to evaluate for your condition
  * Condition
  * Resource or Output - the resource or output you want to conditionally create
## Transform
* Specifies one or more Transforms that CF uses to process your template. You can simplify templates by condensing and reusing template components.
* Two kinds of Transforms: `AWS::Serverless` and `AWS::Include`
* Serverless refers to Lambda functions
* Includes are very much like includes in programming languages. You can include code snippets in your template.
## Resources
* The only required element in a template. Every resource that you need in your stack will be declared in this section.
## Outputs
* Declares output values that will be displayed in CF Outputs tab, after your stack is created.
* Also can be used for Cross-Stack references: output stack values that can be imported into other stacks.
---
# Intrinsic Functions