# Setting up an EC2 Instance
<!-- TOC -->

- [Setting up an EC2 Instance](#setting-up-an-ec2-instance)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [User Data](#user-data)
  - [UserData for Windows](#userdata-for-windows)
  - [UserData for Linux](#userdata-for-linux)
- [CloudFormation Helper Scripts](#cloudformation-helper-scripts)
- [CloudFormation Init](#cloudformation-init)
- [Summary](#summary)

<!-- /TOC -->
---
# Introduction

**How would we set up our EC2 Instance?**
* Starting services
* Configuration
* Creating users and groups
* Downloading and installing your applications
* Downloading and installing dependencies and packages

In this chapter, we will set up our EC2 instance as follows:
* Download and install a web server
* Download and install PHP
* Host a "Hello World" PHP script
* Start the web server
---
# User Data

We need to bootstrap an EC2 instance. The resource `AWS::EC2::Instance` has a property called `UserData`.

The `UserData` has the following characteristics:
* Base64 encoded
* Works for both Linux and Windows (slight differences)
* Only runs on the first boot cycle
* Beware of the time it takes to execute

## UserData for Windows
<details>
  <summary>Click here to view UserData for Windows.</summary><br>
* Run as local administrator
* Can be Batch commands and / or Powershell
* Executed by **EC2Config** or **EC2Launch** (output logs vary)

**Example**
```xml
<script>
  echo Current date and time >> %SystemRoot%\Temp\test.log
  echo %DATE% %TIME% >> %SystemRoot%\Temp\test.log
</script>

<powershell>
  $file = $env:SystemRoot + "\Temp\" + (Get-Date).ToString("MM-dd-yy-hh-mm")
  New-Item $file -ItemType file
</powershell>
```
</details>

## UserData for Linux
<details>
  <summary>Click here to view UserData for Linux.</summary><br>
* Run as root (no need for sudo)
* Not run interactively (no user feedback)
* Logs output to `/var/log/cloud-init-output.log`
* Starts with `#!` and the interpreter

**Example**
```yml
Resources:
  EC2Instance:
    Type: AWS::EC2::Instance
    Properties:
      UserData:
        !Base64 |
          #!/bin/bash -xe
          yum update -y
          yum install httpd -y
          service httpd start
```
> :information_source: : We use the intrinsic function `!Base64` to encode the script in Base64.
---
</details>

# CloudFormation Helper Scripts
Procedural scripting is not ideal. To solve this problem, **CF** provides Python-based helper scripts to optimize this.

The **CF Helper Scripts** come preinstalled on Amazon Linux. These scripts are not executed automatically so you will need to call upon them in your template.

They are updated periodically, or you can update them using `yum install -y aws-cfn-bootstrap`.

There are four CF Helper Scripts:
* `cfn-init` - reads and interprets Metadata to execute `AWS::CloudFormation::Init`
* `cfn-signal` - used to signal when resource or application is ready
* `cfn-get-metadata` - used to retrieve metadata based on a specific key
* `cfn-hup` - used to check for updates to metadata and execute custom hooks
---
# CloudFormation Init
The `cfn-init` helper script enables us to use `AWS::CloudFormation::Init`. This allows us to setup our EC2 instance in a declarative approach.

The `config` key for `AWS::CloudFormation::Init` is declared in a template as follows:

```yml
Resources:
  MyInstance:
    Type: "AWS::EC2::Instance"
    Metadata:
      AWS::CloudFormation::Init:
        config:
          packages:
          groups:
          users:
          sources:
          files:
          commands:
          services:
    Properties:
```
You can have one or more config keys. For a single config key, call it `config`.

If you need multiple config keys, use `Configsets`, which contain a list of config keys, in a desired execution order.

**Example**
```yml
Resources:
  MyInstance:
    Type: "AWS::EC2::Instance"
    Metadata:
      AWS::CloudFormation::Init:
        Configsets:
          - "install-web"
          - "install-php"
```

These keys fall under each config:
* `packages` - download and install pre-packaged applications and components
* `groups` - create Linux groups and to assign group IDs
* `users` - create Linux users on the EC2 instance
* `sources` - download an archive file and unpack it in a target directory on the EC2
* `files` - create files on the EC2 instance
* `commands` - execute commands on the EC2 instance
* `services` - define which services should be enabled / disabled when the instance is launched
---
# Summary
1. `UserData`- Is executed on first start.
2. **CloudFormation Helper Scripts** - In `UserData` section, call the `cfn-init` helper script.
3. `AWS::CloudFormation::Init` - Declarative meta data to setup. Cleaner and more powerful approach to setting up your EC2 instance.

**Example**
```yml
Resources:
  EC2Instance:
    ...
    Metadata:
      AWS::CloudFormation::Init:
        config:
          packages:
            yum:
              httpd: []
              php: []
            files:
              /var/www/html/index.php:
                content: !Sub |
                  <?php print "Hello world Abs was here!"; ?>
            services:
              sysvinit:
                httpd:
                  enabled: true
                  ensureRunning: true
    Properties:
      ...
      UserData:
        !Base64:
          !Sub |
            #!/bin/bash -xe
            # Ensure AWS CFN Bootstrap is the latest
            yum install -y aws-cfn-bootstrap
            # Install the files and packages from the metadata
            /opt/aws/bin/cfn-init -v --stack ${AWS::StackName} --resource EC2Instance --region ${AWS::Region}
```
> :information_source: : We use the intrinsic function `!Sub` to evaluate the AWS pseudo parameters, eg. `AWS::Region`.
