# CloudFormation Features
<!-- TOC -->

- [CloudFormation Features](#cloudformation-features)
- [Intrinsic Functions](#intrinsic-functions)
- [Multiple Resources](#multiple-resources)
- [Pseudo Parameters](#pseudo-parameters)
- [Mappings](#mappings)
- [Input Parameters](#input-parameters)
- [Outputs](#outputs)
- [Alias](#alias)
- [Anchors](#anchors)

<!-- /TOC -->
---
# Intrinsic Functions
**Intrinsic Functions** are built-in functions that help you manage your stacks. There are more than 10 intrinsic functions.

These are some common intrinsic functions:
* `!Join` - appends a set of values into a single value
* `!Ref` - references an object from elsewhere in a template
* `!GetAttr` - get AWS data from an existing resource

How to use `!Join` function: `!Join [Delimiter, [comma-delimited list of values]]`

---
# Multiple Resources
In this section, we combine an **EC2 instance** and a **Security Group** ["SG"] to open port 22. These need to be created in a specific order, for example, the EC2 instance need to specify a SG when it is created. 

The order of creation is:
* SG
* EC2

**Example:**
```yml
Resources:
  Ec2Instance:
    Type: 'AWS::EC2::Instance'
    Properties:
      InstanceType: t2.micro
      ImageId: ami-43874721 # Amazon Linux AMI in Sydney
      Tags:
        - Key: "Name"
          Value: !Join [ " ", [ EC2, Instance, with, Fn, Join ] ]
      SecurityGroups:
        - !Ref MySecurityGroup
  MySecurityGroup:
    Type: 'AWS::EC2::SecurityGroup'
    Properties:
      GroupDescription: Enable SSH access via port 22
      SecurityGroupIngress:
        - IpProtocol: tcp
          FromPort: '22'
          ToPort: '22'
          CidrIp: 0.0.0.0/0
```
> :information_source: : We use the intrinsic function `!Ref` to reference `MySecurityGroup` in our EC2 instance. **CF** is going to figure out the dependencies automatically, and create the resources in the correct order.
---
# Pseudo Parameters
**Pseudo Parameters** are predefined by **CF** and are similar to environment variables. We use the intrinsic function `!Ref` to reference these parameters.

These are some common pseudo parameters:
* `AWS::AccountId` - returns the AWS account ID of the account
* `AWS::NotificationARNS` - returns the list of notification ARNs for the current stack
* `AWS::StackId` - returns the ID of the stack
* `AWS::StackName` - returns the name of the stack
* `AWS::Region` - returns a string representing the AWS Region in which the resource is being created
* [Pseudo parameters reference](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/pseudo-parameter-reference.html)

**Example:**
```yml
Resources:
...
      Tags:
        - Key: "Name"
          Value: !Join
            - ""
            - - "EC2 Instance for "
              - !Ref AWS::Region
```
---
# Mappings
**Mappings** enable you to use an input value to determine another value. For example, as AMI IDs are region specific, we need to use mappings to determine an AMI ID.

To solve this, we will use:
* Pseudo parameters
* Intrinsic function `FindInMap`
* Mappings

How to use `FindInMap` function: `!FindInMap [MapName, TopLevelKey, SecondLevelKey]`

**Example**
```yml
Mappings:
  RegionMap:
    us-east-1:
      AMI: ami-76f0061f
    us-west-1:
      AMI: ami-655a0a20
Resources:
  Ec2Instance:
    ...
    Properties:
      ImageId: !FindInMap
        - RegionMap
        - !Ref 'AWS::Region'
        - AMI
```
---
# Input Parameters
**Input Parameters** enable us to input custom values to our template. They are defined within the top level `Parameters` section.

Each parameter must be assigned a value at runtime, although yoc can specify a default value. The only required attribute is **Type** which is the data type.

Support Types:
* String
* Number
* List<Number>
* CommaDelimitedList
* AWS-specific types (eg. `AWS::EC2::Image::Id`, `AWS::EC2::KeyPair::KeyName`)
* Systems Manager Parameter type

Use an AWS-specific type to present a drop-down list with available instances of the type.

**Example**
```yml
Parameters:
  InstTypeParam:
    Type: String
    Default: t2.micro
    AllowedValues:
      - t2.micro
      - m1.small
      - m1.large
    Description:
      EC2 Instance Type
Resources:
  Ec2Instance:
    ...
    Properties:
      InstanceType: !Ref InstTypeParam
```
> :information_source: : We use the intrinsic function `!Ref` to reference our input parameter `InstTypeParam`. 
---
# Outputs
Outputs enable us to get access to information about resources within a stack. They are defined within the top level `Outputs` section of the template. 

For example, create an EC2 instance, and output the Public IP or DNS.

**Example**
```yml
Outputs:
  ServerDns:
    Value: !GetAtt
        - EC2Instance
        - PublicDnsName
```
> :information_source: : We use the intrinsic function `!GetAtt` to get the AWS data `PublicDnsName` for our EC2 instance. 
---
# Alias

**Example**

```yml
Resources:
  Ec2Instance:
    Type: &ec2type 'AWS::EC2::Instance'
  ...
  MyInstance:
    Type: *ec2type
```

---
# Anchors

**Example**

```yml
EC2_Properties: &ec2properties
  InstanceType: t2.micro
  ImageId: ami-43874721 # Amazon Linux AMI in Sydney

Resources:
  MyInstance:
    Type: *ec2type
    Properties:
      <<: *ec2properties
```